# ProductsDB

The task at hand was to create a product database, seed it with 5m+ products, and display some statistical data in charts by querying the database.

[TOC]

## A. Problem analysis

There were 2 main areas to focus when tackling the above task. The first was how to handle seeding the database with this amount of data, and the second was how to best query the data from the db and display the statistics.

### A1. Seeding the database

The best way to seed the database was using chunks in the database seeder. That meant splitting the seeing in smaller pieces/chunks in order to avoid memory exhaustion issues. Further to that, insert was used instead of create as it is faster, and the product array was emptied in each iteration to avoid memory leakage. Lastly the php memory limit on the docker container was increased, as the default 128M didnt give a lot of room to work with.

### A2. Querying the database

During the initial migration 3 indexes were created for the columns that would be queried. This would help for fetching the queried data from the database faster.
While querying the database the Query Builder was used instead of Eloquent, for better performance.
For pagination, simple paginate was used instead of paginate, to avoid count in the pagination query which slowed down the query
All statistical data were generated by executing queries on the database, instead of fetching the data and then using Collections methods to generate the statistics

### A3. Application performance monitoring

Sentry was installed on the backed and frontend in order to be able to monitoring the application's performance

## B. Project files

-   Global Styles: resources/css/app.scss.
-   Vue components: resources/js/Pages && resources/js/Shared && resources/js/Layouts.
-   Routes: routes/web.php.
-   Product Model: app/Models/Product.php.
-   Product Controller: app/Http/Controllers/ProductController.php.
-   Product Repository: app/Repositories/ProductRepository.php.
-   Product Requests: app/Http/Requests.
-   Product Seeder: database/Seeders/ProductSeeder.php.

## C Installation instructions

### Run already setup project

Skip to Step 1 if the project has not been set up yet

     npm run docker-start (to start docker containers)
     npm run docker-watch (to npm watch for changes)

### 1. Setup repository

    git init
    git clone git@github.com:geobotsar81/productsdb.git

### 2. Setup docker containers

    sudo mkdir docker/mysql && sudo chmod -R 777 docker
    npm run docker-build

#### 2a. Edit etc/hosts and point your nginx ip address to your domain

    sudo nano /etc/hosts
    172.10.0.6 productsdb.example

### 3. Install composer dependancies

    docker compose run --rm composer install

### 4. Install npm dependancies

    docker compose run --rm npm install

### 5. Fix file permissions

    sudo chmod -R o+w storage/ bootstrap/

### 6. Create storage link

    docker compose run --rm artisan storage:link

### 7. Run Migrations and seed database

    docker exec -it php8 /bin/bash
    php artisan migrate
    php artisan db:seed

### 8. Run tests

    npm run docker-test
    npm run docker-dusk-test

### 9. Other

    docker exec -it php8 /bin/bash
